Add additional checkout fields documentation (#43782)
woocommerce/woocommerce: plugins/woocommerce-blocks/docs/third-party-developers/extensibility/checkout-block/additional-checkout-fields.md

	- [Address](#address)
	- [Additional information](#additional-information)
- [Supported field types](#supported-field-types)
- [Using the API](#using-the-api)
	- [Options](#options)
		- [General options](#general-options)
		- [Options for `text` fields](#options-for-text-fields)
		- [Options for `select` fields](#options-for-select-fields)
		- [Options for `checkbox` fields](#options-for-checkbox-fields)
	- [Attributes](#attributes)
- [Usage examples](#usage-examples)
	- [Rendering a text field](#rendering-a-text-field)
	- [Rendering a checkbox field](#rendering-a-checkbox-field)
	- [Rendering a select field.](#rendering-a-select-field)
- [Validation](#validation)
	- [Example](#example)
- [A full example](#a-full-example)

A common use-case for developers and merchants is to add a new field to the Checkout form to collect additional data about a customer or their order.

This document will outline the steps an extension should take to register some additional checkout fields.

## Available field locations

Additional checkout fields can be registered in three different places:

- Contact information
- Addresses (Shipping **and** Billing)
- Additional information

> 

Reviewer: You can only register one field per location.

Author: Can you clarify what you mean by this? You can register as many fields as you like no?

Reviewer: Yeah I think I phrased it wrong, you can only assign a single location per field.

### Contact information

The contact information section currently renders at the top of the form. It contains the `email` field and any other additional fields.

<img width="715" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/097c2596-c629-4eab-9604-577ee7a14cfe">

Fields rendered here will be saved to the _order_ (i.e. they will not be part of the customer's saved address or account information. New orders will not have any previously used values pre-filled).

### Address

The address section currently contains a form for the shipping address and the billing address. Additional checkout fields can be registered here and they will appear within that form.

<img width="707" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/746d280f-3354-4d37-a78a-a2518eb0e5de">

> If a field is registered in the `address` location it will appear in both the shipping **and** the billing address. It is not possible to have the field in only one of the addresses.

Reviewer: "You will also end up collecting 2 values for this field, one for shipping and one for billing".

> 

Reviewer: "Fields registered here will be saved to both the customer and the order, so returning customers won't need to refill those values again."

### Additional information

As part of the additional checkout fields feature, the checkout block has a new inner block called the "Additional information block".

This block is used to render fields that aren't part of the contact information or address information, for example it may be a "How did you hear about us" field or a "Gift message" field.

<img width="724" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/295b3048-a22a-4225-96b0-6b0371a7cd5f">

By default, this block will render as the last step in the Checkout form, however it can be moved using the Gutenberg block controls in the editor.

> 

Reviewer: "Fields rendered here will be saved to the _order_ (i.e. they will not be part of the customer's saved address or account information. New orders will not have any previously used values pre-filled)."

#### Options for `text` fields

As well as the options above, text fields also support a `required` option. If this is `true` then the shopper _must_ provide a value for this field during the checkout process.

| Option name     | Description                                                                                                                         | Required? | Example                                      | Default value |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------|---|
| `required` | If this is `true` then the shopper _must_ provide a value for this field during the checkout process. | No | `true` | `false` |

#### Options for `select` fields

As well as the options above, select fields must also be registered with an  `options` option. This is used to specify what options the shopper can select.

> The `optionalLabel` option will never be shown as select fields are _always_ required.

Reviewer: I'm not really sure this is the best way to explain this important step. Can we have a dedicated line here (or in the section before it) explaining that Select are always required, and that Checkbox are always optional.

Author: I added a line to the select form, but the checkbox one already reads:

> The checkbox field type does not have any specific options, however `required` will always be `false` for a checkbox field. Making a checkbox field required is not supported.

Not sure how much clearer this can be? Do you have a suggestion to reword that?

Reviewer 2: Just asking why required is top level like this and not input attributes? Could required at server level be handled by validation_callbacks instead?

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Option name</th>
		<th>Description</th>
		<th>Required?</th>
		<th>Example</th>
		<th>Default value</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>

`options`

</td>
		<td>

An array of options to show in the select input. Each options must be an array containing a `label` and `value` property. Each entry must have a unique `value`. Any duplicate options will be removed. The `value` is what gets submitted to the server during checkout and the `label` is simply a user-friendly representation of this value. It is not transmitted to the server in any way.</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>

	[
		[
			'value' => 'store_1',
			'label' => 'Our London Store'
		],
		[
			'value' => 'store_2',
			'label' => 'Our Paris Store'
		],
		[
			'value' => 'store_3',
			'label' => 'Our New York Store'
		]
	]

</td>
		<td>
			No default - this must be provided.
		</td>
	</tr>
</table>

#### Options for `checkbox` fields

The checkbox field type does not have any specific options, however `required` will always be `false` for a checkbox field. Making a checkbox field required is not supported.

### Attributes

> Adding additional attributes to checkbox and text fields is supported. Adding them to select fields is **not**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding additional attributes to checkbox and text fields is supported. Adding them to select fields is **not possible for now**.
```

These attributes have a 1:1 mapping to the HTML attributes on `input` elements (except `pattern` on checkbox).

The supported attributes are:

- `data-*` attributes
- `aria-*` attributes
- `autocomplete`
- `autocapitalize`
- `pattern` (not supported on checkbox fields)
- `title`
- `maxLength` (equivalent to `maxlength` HTML attribute)

> - `readOnly` (equivalent to `readonly` HTML attribute)

Reviewer: Amm I might have missed this but if you're accepting `autocomplete` and `autocapitalize` why are we putting the line at `maxLength` and `readOnly`? Why not accept them as `maxlength` and `readonly`?

`maxLength` and `readOnly` are in camelCase because the attributes are rendered on a React element which must receive them in this format.

> 

Reviewer: We should mention that we omitted certain attributes intentionally but are welcome to hear feedback, those attributes are `autofocus`, `disabled`, `readonly`.

					'title'            => 'Title to show on hover',
					'data-custom'      => 'custom data',
				),
			),
		);
	}
);
```

This results in the following address form (the billing form will be the same):

<img width="696" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/f6eb3c6f-9178-4978-8e74-e6b2ea353192">

The rendered markup looks like this:

```html
<input type="text" id="shipping-namespace/gov-id" autocapitalize="off"
       autocomplete="government-id" aria-label="custom aria label"
       aria-describedby="some-element" required="" aria-invalid="true"
       title="Title to show on hover" pattern="[A-Z0-9]{5}"
       data-custom="custom data" value="" >
```

### Rendering a checkbox field

This example demonstrates rendering a checkbox field in the contact information section:

```php
add_action(
	'woocommerce_loaded',
	function() {
		woocommerce_blocks_register_checkout_field(
			array(
				'id'       => 'namespace/marketing-opt-in',
				'label'    => 'Do you want to subscribe to our newsletter?',
				'location' => 'contact',
				'type'     => 'checkbox',
			)
		);
	}
);
```

This results in the following contact information section:

> <img width="721" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/7444e41a-97cc-451d-b2c9-4eedfbe05724">

Reviewer: This raises a good point, if checkbox is always optional, should we show the optional? I think no? but I'm not sure and I don't feel strongly about this.

				'label'    => 'How did you hear about us?',
				'location' => 'additional',
				'type'     => 'select',
				'options'  => [
					[
						'value' => 'google',
						'label' => 'Google'
					],
					[
						'value' => 'facebook',
						'label' => 'Facebook'
					],
					[
						'value' => 'friend',
						'label' => 'From a friend'
					],
					[
						'value' => 'other',
						'label' => 'Other'
					],
				]
			)
		);
	}
);
```

This results in the additional information section being rendered like so:

<p>
	<img width="701" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/bbe17ad0-7c7d-419a-951d-315f56f8898a"><br />
	<em>The select input before being focused</em>
</p>

<p>
	<img width="724" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/bd943906-621b-404f-aa84-b951323e25d3"><br />
	<em>The select input when focused</em>
</p>

If it is undesirable to force the shopper to select a value, providing a value such as "None of the above" may help.

## Validation

It is possible to add custom validation to any registered additional checkout field as long as you know its namespace and ID.

> To do so, use the `woocommerce_blocks_validate_additional_field_{namespace}` filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, use the `woocommerce_blocks_validate_additional_field_{id}` filter.
```

|-----------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `$error`        | `WP_Error` | A `WP_Error` object. Initially it is empty. This filter should add errors to it using the [`add`](https://developer.wordpress.org/reference/classes/wp_error/add/) method. The returned value of this filter must be the _same_ WP_Error that was passed to it. |
| `$field_value`  | `mixed`      | The current value of the field, i.e. what the user entered in the checkout form.                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `$field_schema` | `array`      | The schema of the field. This is what is registered with Store API. This is useful to know what values are valid for select fields.                                                                                                                             |

> | `$key`          | `string`     | The field's key (composed of namespace/id)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: I'm raising this in slack but:

- I don't see much value in field key here.
- I'm torn a bit about field_schema
- We do really need the order, customer, and/or request here.

Author: Updated in https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/pull/43789 and docs updated in fd5ce3e63cb044a1eedbba78e6337cb08f39648f.

> I'm torn a bit about field_schema

Required to allow extensions to see other possible options on the `select` fields, I think it's potentially useful to expose, but I would also be OK not exposing it. I don't have a strong preference either way. It can be re-added later if we feel it is needed? Should we remove it in https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/pull/43789?

Author: For now i'm going to remove this, we can re-add it later if needed. Better to start small then add rather than try and reduce later 👌🏼  will open a PR.

Author: Removed in https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/pull/44012

            - [Example of location validation](#example-of-location-validation)
- [A full example](#a-full-example)

A common use-case for developers and merchants is to add a new field to the Checkout form to collect additional data about a customer or their order.

This document will outline the steps an extension should take to register some additional checkout fields.

## Available field locations

Additional checkout fields can be registered in three different places:

- Contact information
- Addresses (Shipping **and** Billing)
- Additional information

A field can only be shown in one location, it is not possible to render the same field in multiple locations in the same registration.

### Contact information

The contact information section currently renders at the top of the form. It contains the `email` field and any other additional fields.

![Showing the contact information section with two fields rendered, email and an additional checkout field (optional)](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/097c2596-c629-4eab-9604-577ee7a14cfe)

> Fields rendered here will be saved to the _order_ (i.e. they will not be part of the customer's saved address or account information. New orders will not have any previously used values pre-filled).

Reviewer 2: We're saving contact details to account. They render under my account > account details.

### Address

> The address section currently contains a form for the shipping address and the billing address. Additional checkout fields can be registered here and they will appear within that form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "Address" section currently contains a form for the shipping address and the billing address. Additional checkout fields can be registered to appear within these forms.
```

This block is used to render fields that aren't part of the contact information or address information, for example it may be a "How did you hear about us" field or a "Gift message" field.

Fields rendered here will be saved to the order. They will not be part of the customer's saved address or account information. New orders will not have any previously used values pre-filled.

![The additional order information section containing an additional checkout field](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/295b3048-a22a-4225-96b0-6b0371a7cd5f)

By default, this block will render as the last step in the Checkout form, however it can be moved using the Gutenberg block controls in the editor.

![The additional order information block in the post editor"](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/05a3d7d9-b3af-4445-9318-443ae2c4d7d8)

## Supported field types

The following field types are supported:

- `select`
- `text`
- `checkbox`

There are plans to expand this list, but for now these are the types available.

## Using the API

To register additional checkout fields you must use the `woocommerce_blocks_register_checkout_field` function.

> It is recommended to run this function after the `woocommerce_loaded` action.

Reviewer 2: Should we recommend `woocommerce_blocks_loaded`?

| `label`         | The label shown on your field. This will be the placeholder too.                                                                       | Yes       | `How did you hear about us?`                 | No default - this must be provided.                                        |
| `optionalLabel` | The label shown on your field if it is optional. This will be the placeholder too.                                                     | No        | `How did you hear about us? (Optional)`      | The default value will be the value of `label` with `(optional)` appended. |
| `location`      | The location to render your field.                                                                                                     | Yes       | `contact`, `address`, or `additional`        | No default - this must be provided.                                        |
| `type`          | The type of field you're rendering. It defaults to `text` and must match one of the supported field types.                             | No        | `text`, `select`, or `checkbox`              | `text`                                                                     |

> | `attributes`    | An array of additional attributes to render on the field's input element. This is _not_ supported for `select` fields.                 | No        | `[	'data-custom-data' => 'my-custom-data' ]` | `[]`                                                                       |

Reviewer 2: `sanitize_callback` A function called to sanitize the customer provided value when posted.
`validate_callback` A functionc a called to validate the customer provided value when posted, after sanitization.

![The select input before being focused](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/bbe17ad0-7c7d-419a-951d-315f56f8898a)

### The select input when focused

![The select input when focused](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/bd943906-621b-404f-aa84-b951323e25d3)

If it is undesirable to force the shopper to select a value, providing a value such as "None of the above" may help.

## Validation and sanitization

It is possible to add custom validation and sanitization for additional checkout fields using WordPress action hooks.

These actions happen in two places:

1. Updating and submitting the form during the checkout process and,
2. Updating address/contact information in the "My account" area.

### Sanitization

Sanitization is used to ensure the value of a field is in a specific format. An example is when taking a government ID, you may want to format it so that all letters are capitalized and there are no spaces. At this point, the value should **not** be checked for _validity_. That will come later. This step is only intended to set the field up for validation.

#### Using the `woocommerce_blocks_sanitize_additional_field` filter

> To run a custom sanitization function for a field use the `woocommerce_blocks_sanitize_additional_field` action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run a custom sanitization function for a field you can use the `sanitize_callback` function on registration, or the `woocommerce_blocks_sanitize_additional_field` filter.
```

###### The `WP_Error` object

When adding your error to the `WP_Error` object, it should have a unique error code. You may want to prefix the error code with the plugin namespace to reduce the chance of collision. Using codes that are already in use across other plugins may result in the error message being overwritten or showing in a different location.

###### Example of single-field validation

The below example shows how to apply custom validation to the `namespace/gov-id` text field from above. The code here ensures the field is made up of 5 characters, either upper-case letters or numbers. The sanitization function from the example above ensures that all whitespace is removed and all letters are capitalized, so this check is an extra safety net to ensure the input matches the pattern.

```php
add_action(
'woocommerce_blocks_validate_additional_field',
	function ( WP_Error $errors, $field_key, $field_value ) {
		if ( 'namespace/gov-id' === $field_key ) {
			$match = preg_match( '/[A-Z0-9]{5}/', $field_value );
			if ( 0 === $match || false === $match ) {
				$errors->add( 'invalid_gov_id', 'Please ensure your government ID matches the correct format.' );
			}
		}

> 		return $error;

Reviewer 2: No return needed here.

	},
	10,
	4
);
```

> It is important to note that this action must _add_ errors to the `WP_Error` object it receives. Returning a different `WP_Error` object or any other value will result in the errors not showing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to note that this action must _add_ errors to the `WP_Error` object it receives. Returning a new `WP_Error` object or any other value will result in the errors not showing.
```

       aria-describedby="some-element" required="" aria-invalid="true"
       title="Title to show on hover" pattern="[A-Z0-9]{5}"
       data-custom="custom data" value="" >
```

### Rendering a checkbox field

This example demonstrates rendering a checkbox field in the contact information section:

```php
add_action(
	'woocommerce_loaded',
	function() {
		__experimental_woocommerce_blocks_register_checkout_field(
			array(
				'id'       => 'namespace/marketing-opt-in',
				'label'    => 'Do you want to subscribe to our newsletter?',
				'location' => 'contact',
				'type'     => 'checkbox',
			)
		);
	}
);
````

This results in the following contact information section:

![The contact information section with a newsletter subscription checkbox rendered inside it](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/assets/5656702/7444e41a-97cc-451d-b2c9-4eedfbe05724)

Note that because an `optionalLabel` was not supplied, the string `(optional)` is appended to the label. To remove that an `optionalLabel` property should be supplied to override this.

### Rendering a select field

This example demonstrates rendering a select field in the additional information section:

```php
add_action(

> 	'woocommerce_loaded',

Reviewer 2: switch action to blocks

    - `__experimental_woocommerce_blocks_validate_location_contact_fields`

##### Example of location validation

In this example, assume there is another field registered alongside the `namespace/gov-id` called `namespace/confirm-gov-id`. This field will be a confirmation for the Government ID field.

The example below illustrates how to verify that the value of the confirmation field matches the value of the main field.

```php
add_action(
	'__experimental_woocommerce_blocks_validate_location_address_fields',
	function ( \WP_Error $errors, $fields, $group ) {
		if ( $fields['namespace/gov-id'] !== $fields['namespace/confirm-gov-id'] ) {
			$errors->add( 'gov_id_mismatch', 'Please ensure your government ID matches the confirmation.' );
		}
	},
	10,
	3
);
```

If these fields were rendered in the "contact" location instead, the code would be the same except the hook used would be: `__experimental_woocommerce_blocks_validate_location_contact_fields`.

## A full example

In this full example we will register the Government ID text field and verify that it conforms to a specific pattern.

This example is just a combined version of the examples shared above.

```php
add_action(

> 	'woocommerce_loaded',

Reviewer 2: blocks loaded
